I was constantly hitting my Claude code
limits, and now I can use it all day and
haven't hit a usage limit in weeks.
Here's what I changed. I dug into my
setup and figured out that I was wasting
a huge amount of tokens on invisible
context blow I didn't even know was
there. Since then, I've been testing the
best ways to keep my usage down, and
right now I'm going to walk you through
what I changed in my setup so I never
hit my usage limits. Plus, give you a
Claude skill that audits your whole
Claude code setup, tells you exactly
what's costing you and how you can fix
it. You can install it and run it
whenever you're looking to keep things
clean in your repo, and giving it away
for free at the link in the description.
So, let's get into it. Just a quick
primer in case you haven't seen this
explained already, but every time that
you message Claude code, it rereads the
entire conversation, every single
message. In fact, message 30 actually
costs 31 times more than your first
message when you're in a Claude code
session. On top of that, all of your
Claude.md files, your MCP servers,
skills are all preloaded into your
context window on every single session.
More context means better results
usually, but it also means more cost and
more usage. It can even sometimes result
in a worse output because as context
bloats, the LLM only pays attention to
the end of your context, and you miss
out to miss the beginning of your
context window. So, bloated context
means you're paying more and getting
less output. So, the key strategy that I
put in place was reducing that starting
context by removing a bunch of invisible
sources of context that were bloating my
Claude code environment. So, here's how
you would actually see this. If you go
and run  context in front inside
of a fresh Claude code session, you'll
see exactly how many tokens you're
already paying for without sending a
single message. That'll be your system
tools, your MCP servers, skills, all of
that bloating your context window. For
me, when I ran this skill before making
any enhancements, that was over 50,000
tokens that I was paying for. And every
message from here is compounding on top
of it. So, let me walk you through some
of the biggest sources of what that
context blow was coming from and how I
solved each one of them. The number one
issue for me was MCP server. Every
connected MCP server loads all of its
tool definitions into your context on
every single message, and not just when
you call that tool, every message. One
server can have about 18,000 tokens
worth of tool definitions. If you have a
few of these servers compounding, that
can be over 70,000 tokens of dead weight
on every single turn. The fix here is
actually dead simple. If you run
MCP at the start of every session,
you'll see all of the MCP tools that you
have connected at the moment. What I
would do is go through and disconnect
all the ones that I'm not actively
planning on using in that session, and
that saves a bunch of context. The other
thing that I'm doing to take this a step
further is by replacing my MCPs with
CLIs or command line interfaces if
they're available. The reason I'm doing
this is because a CLI only costs tokens
when Claude actually calls that command,
and an MCP server costs tokens just by
existing in your session. And by
replacing it with CLIs, you can expect a
40% savings in tokens usage. I've done
this with the Playwright MCP and Appify
recently, and it's been really making a
difference for me. Your Claude.md gets
loaded into context at the start of
every session, and those tokens are part
of every API call to the Claude API from
that point on. So, there are three
things that you should do to your
Claude.md file to optimize it and reduce
your usage. The first is check for
contradictions. Be concise in one
section, but then in another section it
says, "Always explain your reasoning in
detail." In another, Claude can't
satisfy both of these requests. If it
picks one, you'll get inconsistent
output and you don't know why. It also
bloats your file. Second is cutting
instructions that aren't earning their
place. There are five questions to ask
about every single rule. Is this
something Claude already does by default
without being told? Does it contradict
another rule? Does it repeat something
already covered? And was it a band-aid
for a specific bad output? Is it so
vague that Claude would interpret it
differently every time, like be more
natural or use a good tone? If a rule
fails any of these, cut it. The audit
skill that I've linked in the
description below uses these five
filters and gives you a list of what to
remove and a reason for each. It's
better to be ruthless about this and cut
more than add it back what you need
later. Third, and this is the biggest
one for me, was progressive disclosure
in my Claude.md. Your core Claude.md
should only contain rules that apply to
every single session in that repository.
Universal stuff like style preferences
and project structure. Everything else
goes into your reference files. API
conventions, you put them in an API
standards.md and add one line to your
Claude.md, "For API conventions, read
API standards.md." But this goes for
development patterns, testing
guidelines, development rules, all of
the same thing. One-line pointers to
more detailed resources. Claude only
reads those files when it actually So,
instead of a 5,000 token Claude.md file
sitting at the root of your repo with
detailed instructions for how to deploy
APIs when you're working on the front
end, you've got maybe 500 lines of the
core file with one-line references to
reference docs, which Claude pulls in on
demand. Next is skills. Same idea
applies to skills. Every skill you have
installed gets its metadata loaded into
context so Claude can decide whether to
trigger it or not. If you're loading up
a setup with tons of skills, you're
bloating your context for very little
return. And if those skills are 400,
500, 800 lines of verbose instructions,
which a lot of them are if you're
downloading them from free skill
marketplaces online, then those are the
ones that are burning up even more of
your context. More instructions doesn't
necessarily mean a better output when it
comes to skills. Past a certain point,
Claude starts ignoring rules as there's
too much competing for its attention.
The best skills are concise and short.
The audit skill that I have linked in
the description below runs the same five
filters on your skills. It tells you
which ones are overly verbose and which
ones aren't providing you enough value
to justify their usage. Number three is
settings. There are a few things in your
settings.json that's still tuned for the
old hunt for the old 200,000 context
window that Claude used to have, and
most people never really set these up at
all, so I'm going to go through a few
quick ones that I added to help me with
my context window. Number one was auto
compact. Claude auto compacts somewhere
around 83% of your context window by
default, but the output quality starts
degrading well before that. If you set
auto compact percentage override to
about 75, compaction triggers earlier
before the quality degrades. Bash
output. When Claude runs a shell
command, it can only read a limited
number of characters. The default is
between 30 and 50,000. Anything beyond
that gets silently truncated. Then
Claude reruns the entire command and
asks for more information. That's a lot
of wasted tokens on retry. So, what you
need to do is set the bash max output
length environment variable to 150,000
tokens. Another one is file permissions.
By default, Claude code can read
everything in your project. Node
modules, the dist folder, the lock
files, and build artifacts. The fix is
to add deny rules into your
settings.json permissions. It works like
a git ignore, but for Claude. Tell it
which directories it can't read, it
stops wasting context on stuff it
doesn't need to know. The audit also
checks for these. It's If it's missing
auto compact, missing bash output
override, or missing any of these deny
rules, it will flag them and tell you
exactly what to add. So, before we get
into the quick wins, show you how to
install the audit skill real quick. It
takes about 10 seconds. So, here's how
you can get really quickly set up with
the context audit skill inside of your
Claude code. You'll just need to go to
the Google Drive link in the description
below and download the Claude skill.
Once you've got the skill installed,
just write  context audit, and
it'll go through and run all of the
analysis that you need to get your
Claude context window into tip-top
shape. So, I've just run it here and
it's given me a score of one out of 100.
It's recommended a bunch of different
things that we can do to fix up my
context. Once I've done that, all I have
to do is ask Claude to go and implement
those fixes, and it's done. Claude will
go ahead and handle all of it. It'll
split up my Claude.md file, it will
remove any unnecessary skills, and add
all the settings that I'm missing.
That's how you install it. Just a quick
thing. Right now, everyone is sharing
Claude skills. They're cloning repos,
installing code they haven't reviewed,
and the number one question I keep
hearing is, "How do I know that this is
safe?" I'm building a marketplace for
verified Claude code skills, security
reviewed, vetted by real engineers and
domain experts, so you know exactly what
you're getting before you install it.
That sounds useful, the waitlist link is
in the description below. All right, so
that's all the setup stuff. Everything
up to this point is about pruning out
the invisible waste. Now, let me go
through the habits that make a big
difference day-to-day. You might have
heard a few of these already, but
they're genuinely useful for keeping
your usage under control. Remember to
start fresh sessions between unrelated
tasks. Remember how token costs
compounds with every message? If you
just finished a 20-message uh session on
content research, and now you're
switching to script writing, every
scripting message is still paying the
tax of all of that research content. The
clear command fixes that with a
fresh session, fresh context. This one
habit probably saves more tokens than
anything else on this list. Use the plan
mode before anything non-trivial. This
is the single most expensive mistake in
Claude code is letting it go down the
wrong path. It writes 200 lines of code,
then you realize it's misunderstood the
task, and now you have to scrap it and
start over. This happens to me all the
time. All of these tokens are now gone.
Plan mode lets Claude ask you clarifying
questions first, map out the approach,
and then from there get alignment before
it starts to write a single line. If you
want to take this a step further, have a
look at some of the development
frameworks like BMAD or PRD, they go
deep into planning loops. When Claude
gets something wrong, don't send a
follow-up correction. Every follow-up
message gets added to a conversation
history permanently. So, now you've got
the bad response and your correction and
the new response all sitting in your
context compounding on every future
message. The bad exchanges get replaced
entirely. You save the tokens from the
bad response and the correction and you
don't pollute the rest of your session.
The next thing is using the right model
for the job. Sonnet handles most coding
work. Haiku is great for sub agents,
formatting, and simple lookups. And if
you're looking to make deep
architectural planning choices when
Sonnet is in current it, that's when you
use Opus. Most important takeaway here
is that it's not a limits problem, it's
a context hygiene problem and your setup
drifts over time. That's why I built the
audit as a skill and not a one-time
checklist. Install it once and run it
whenever you want. The context audit
skill is free and it's at the link in
the description below. Drop it in your
skills folder and run it. It checks
everything we talked about and gives you
a score, tells you exactly what to cut
and why. Drop a comment with any
questions, I read every single one. And
if you're rolling out Claude Code across
a team or business and want help getting
that done right from the start, there's
a link for strategy sessions in the
description below as well. Thanks for
watching.